se Se NSTITUTE LipraRy 
W JERSEY | 
LECTURES 
OW 
REVIVALS OF RELIGION 
’ 
eaaUT ya 
Lectures on Revivals 
152.3 Of Religion 
cY4a7l 
IBS 
By 
CHARLES G. FINNEY 
Author of “ Lectures xo Professing Christians,® 
“Sermons on Gospel Themes,” ett. 
) C 
Fleming H. Revell Company 
New York AND LonDON 
Library 
The Master’s College 
Santa Clarita, CA 91322-0878 
Baterec according to Act of Congress in the year 1988, 57 
zE. J. GOODRICH, 
4s the Clerk’s Uffice of tae District Court of the United States for the Northen 
District of Ohio. 
es 
4 
Printed in the United States of America 

THE LECTURERS PREFACE 
Let it be remembered, that these Lectures were aelivered to my own 
songregation. They were entered upon, without my having previously 
marked out any plan or outline of them, and have been pursued, from 
week to week, as one subject naturally introduced another, and as, from 
one lecture to another, I saw the state of our people seemed to require. 

I consented to have the Editor of the Hvangelist report them, upon 
his own responsibility, because he thought that it might excite a deeper 
interest in, and extend the usefulness of, his paper. And as Iam now 
a Pastor, and have not sufficient health to labor as an Evangelist, and 
as it has pleased the Head of the Church to give me some experience 
in revivals of religion, 1 thought it possible that, while I was doing the 
work of a Pastor in my own church, I might, in this way, be of some 
_ little service to the churches abroaa. 

I found a particular inducement to this course, in the fact that on my 
return from the Mediterranean, I learned, with pain, that the spirit of 
revival had greatly declined in the United States, and that a spirit of 
jangling and controversy alarmingly prevailed. 

The peculiar circumstances of the church, and the state of revivals, 
was such, as unavoidably to lead me to the discussion of some points 
that I would gladly have avoided, had the omission been consistent 
with my main design, to reach and arouse the church, when she was 
fast settling down upon her lees. 

Iam far from setting up the claim of infallibility upon this or any 
other subject. I have given my own views, so far as I have gone, with 
out pretending to have exhausted the subject, or to have spoken in the 
best possible manner upon the points I have discussed. 

1 am too well acquainted with the state of the church, and especially 
with the state of some of its ministers, to expect to escape without 
censure. I have felt obliged to say some things that I fear will not, in 
all instances, be received as kindly as they were intended. But what- 
ever may be the result of saying the truth as it respects some, I have 
reason to believe, that the great body of praying people will receive 
and be benefited by what I have said. 

What I have said upon the subject of prayer, will not, I am wel 
aware, be understood and received by a certain portion of the church, 
and all I can say is, “ He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear.” 

(isi) 

iv THE LECTURER’S PREFACE. 
I had not the most distant idea until recently, that these Lectures, in 
this, or any other form, would ever grow into a book ; but the urgent 
call for their publication, in a volume, and the fact that I have had re 
peated assurances that the reading of them in the Ewangelist, has been 
owned and blessed, to the quickening of individuals and churches, and 
has resulted in the conversion of many sinners, have led me to consent 
to their publication in this imperfect form. 

The Reporter has succeeded, in general, in giving an outline of the 
uectures, as they were delivered. His report, however, would, in gen 
eral, make no more than a full skeleton of what was said on the subject 
at the time. In justice to the Reporter, I would say, that on reading 
nis reports, in his paper, although there were some mistakes and mis 
apprehensions, yet I have been surprised that, without stenography, he 
could so nearly report my meaning. 

As fur literary merit, they have none; nor do they lay claim to any 
It was no part of my design to deliver elegant Lectures. They were 
my most familiar Friday evening discourses ; and my great, and ] may 
add my only object, was to have them understood and felt. 

In correcting the Lectures for a volume, I have not had time, nor was 
it thought advisable to remodel them, and change the style in which 
they had been reported. I have, in some few instances, changed the 
phraseology, when a thought had been very awkwardly expressed, or 
when the true idea had not been given. But I have, in nearly every 
instance, left the sentences as they were reported when the thought 
was perspicuously expressed, although the style might have been im- 
proved by emendation. They were the editor’s reports, and as such 
they must go before the public, with such little additions and altera. 
tions, as I have had time to make. Could I have written them out in 
full, I doubt not but they might have been more acceptable to many 
readers. But this was impossible, and the only alternative was, to iet 
the public have them as they are, or refuse to let them go out in the 
form of a volume at all. I am sorry they are not better Lectures, and in 
& more attracting form ; but I have done what I could under the circum- 
stances ; and, as it is the wish of many whom I love, and delight to please 
and honor, to have them, although in this imperfect form, they must 
have them. 
C. G@. FINNEY. 

By perusing the above Preface, the reader will get a clue to the time 
and cirowmstances that led to the delivery and publication of these Lec 
tures. In revising them for a new edition, I have done little more than 
sorrect the phraseology in a few instances, add a few foot-notes, and 
replace the last two Lectures by newly-written ones on the same texts, 

THE LECTURER’S PREFACE, v 
and prepared especially for this edition. These Lectures are distinct 
from the course I deliver to my theological class upon the same subject 
That course I may publish before my death. These Lectures have been 
translated in the Welsh and French languages. and have been very 
extensively circulated wherever the English or either of those lan- 
guages is understood. One house in London published 80,000 copies 
in English. They are still in type and in market in Europe, and I 
have the great satisfaction of knowing that they have been made 8 
great blessing to thousands of souls. Consequently, 1 have not thought 
it wise to recast them for the sake of giving them a more attractive 
form. God has owned and blessed the reading of them as they have 
been, and with the exceptions above noticed, I have given them to the 
present and coming generations. If the reader will peruse and remem- 
ber the foregoing preface, he will understand what | said of the church 
and some of the ministers, and why I said it. I beseech my brethren 
not to tabe amiss what I have said, but rather to be assured that every 
sentence has been spoken in love, and often with a sorrowful heart. 
May God continue to add His blessing to the reading of these Lec*ures 
THE AUTHOR. 
OBERLIN COLLEGE, Oct. 32, 1968. 

ADVERTISEMENT BY THE REPORTER, 
{'HE work of reporting these Lectures was undertaken for the pur 
pose of increasing the interest and usefulness of the New York Hwan 
gelist. The Reporter is wholly unacquainted with short-hand, and has, 
therefore, only aimed to give a sketch of the leading thoughts of the 
discourse. It is hardly necessary to mention that Mr. Finney never 
writes his sermons, but guides his course of argument by a skeleton, 
or brief, carefully prepared, and so compact, that it can be written on 
one side of a card, about half as large as one of these printed pages. 
His manner is direct, and his language colloquial and Saxon, and his 
illustrations are drawn from the commonest incidents and maxims of 
life. The Reporter has aimed to preserve, as much as he could, the 
style of the speaker, and is thought to have been in some degree suc- 
cessful. If, in any cases, by letting his language run in a colloquial 
strain, he has made the copy more simple and homely than the original, 
he hopes to be pardoned easily for a fault by no means prevalent. 

If any one should attempt to criticise the style of these Reports, he 
will assuredly lose his labor ; forthe only ambition of the Reporter hag 
been, to make such a use of language as should fully convey the mean- 
ing, and fairly exhibit the manner, of the Lecturer. When words have 
done this, they have done their great work. The notes were taken 
with a pencil, and transcribed in great haste, and sent to the printer 
without revision. In preparing them for republication, in this form, 
Mr. Finney has reviewed them with reference only to this point—the 
correct expression of the sentiment. The style of an off-hand sketch 
has been preserved, partly of choice, and partly from necessity. There 
was no time to remodel the work, and the public voice seemed to be, 
that it was more attractive and more useful in its present condensed 
form. Mr. Finney has, therefore, done little more than to amend where 
the Reporter misapprehended the meaning, or did not express it with 
sufficient distinctness. He has enlarged in a few places where the 
illustrations, as given by the Reporter, seemed to be incomplete, 

My labor with these sketches is now done; and its results are sent 
forth in this permanent form, with the prayer, that God would employ 
the book, as he has already done the newspaper edition, to rouse, and 
teach, and strengthen his people, and to guide, unite, and encourage 
zealous Christians of all classes, in the great duty of saving sinners. 
J. L. 
(vi) 

i 

CONTENTS. 
LECTURE L 3 
Wear A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS........cceees coves 0 eves 9 
LECTURE IL 
WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.........ccccvescosece 22 
LECTURE IIL 
How To PROMOTE A REVIVAL... 0... ccc ccc cccccccccccccess » BB 
LECTURE IV. 
POP RA VATLING PRAYER... s:ochccs o.cvesie css pulse eiceeieh ease papers ae 48 
LECTURE V. 
EME RA NICE (ORs MATTE: cy oicorsisieielela steele o'ete 001010 sVore.0.0iclalele see ae PY] 
LECTURE VL 
BPIRre OF PRAYER asain sects ocd telod tees aiele dee atrelevatetas womens 88 
LECTURE VIL 
Be HITED WITH THE SPORT: iss \\cleclewics 0 c.cesreeeccer ocenes - 101 
LECTURE VIIL 
MEETINGS FOR PRAYER.........cccccccccesceceescesceceses 118 
LECTURE - IX. 
MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS.......ccccccecccsccors oo. 184 
LECTURE X. 
To WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM .......scccceecesecsceees . 149 
LECTURE Xi. 
4 Wis MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL..... Somariey Harateens Ghote Ais 166 
vill CONTENTS. 
LECTURE XII. 
How To. PREACH THE GOSPEIic. a. oases a cele ceie teresa en reloy 188 
LECTURE XIII. 
How CHURCHES CAN AELP MINISTERS............50-0 sce eee 213 
LECTURE XIV. 
MEASURES TO PROM)TE REVIVAIS........ccceescereccceeeee 338 
LECTURE XV. 
LECTURE XVI1. 
NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.......-.. .0-eceeseeecrees 204 
LECTURE XVIL. 
FaLsE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.... 2.2.0... 2 cece cece ee enee 317 
LECTURE XVIIL 
DIRECTIONS ‘TO: SENNERSs: oe noe cise Sere xd s wie sc tim atetaterte atnaerene 345 
LECTURE XIX. 
ENSTRUCTIONS, TO) CONVERTS.» 1a(sc1c.etndie ein isin sin cin n\cleeisesiaie eee 864 
LEQGTURE XX. 
(INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS..........0c00080+ 6 seutees 892 
LECTURE XXL 
BACKSIIDERS*IN “MHEART: <a). Nok te oeitce se dere eee 412 
LECTURE XXIL 
GROWTH: DN GRACE ccs ccccissre oc pe cete.cccel ee cemerser anette Cae 

LECTURES. 
LECTURE I. 
WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS8. 
*exr.—O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of tix 
; “ara taade known ; in wrath remember mercy.—Hab. ili. 2. 
ir is supposed that the prophet Habakkuk was contempo 
rary with Jeremiah, and that this prophecy was uttered in an. 
ticipation of the Babylonish captivity. Looking at the judg- 
ments which were speedily to come upon his nation, the soul 
of the prophet was wrought up to an agony, and he cries out 
in his distress, “O Lord, revive thy work.” As if he had 
said, “O Lord, grant that thy judgments may not make Israel 
desolate. In the midst of these awful years, let the judg- 
- ments of God be made the means of reviving religion among 
us. In wrath remember mercy.” 

Religion is the work of man. It is something for man to do. 
It consists in obeying God with and from the heart. It is 
man’s duty. It is true, God induces him to do it. He influ- 
ences him by his Spirit, because of his great wickedness and 
reluctance to obey. If it were not necessary for God to in- 
fluence men—if men were disposed to obey God, there would 
be no occasion to pray, “O Lord, revive thy work.” The 
ground of necessity for such a prayer is, that men are wholly 
indisposed to obey ; and unless God interpose the influence 
of his Spirit, not a man on earth will ever obey the commands 
of God. 

A “Revival of Religion” presupposes a declension. Al 
most all the religion in the world has been produced by revi 
vals. God has found it necessary to take advantage of thu 
1* (9) 
10 WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS. 
excitability there is in mankind, to produce powerful excite 
ments among them, before he can lead them to obey. Men 
are so spiritually sluggish, there are so many things to lead 
their minds off from religion, and to oppose the influence of 
the Gospel, that it is necessary to raise an excitement among 
them, till the tide rises so high as to sweep away the opposing 
obstacles. They must be so excited that they will break over 
these counteracting influences, before they will obey God. Not 
that excited feeling is religion, for it is not ; but it is excited 
desire, appetite and feeling that prevents religion. The will 
is, in a sense, enslaved by the carnal and worldly desires. 
Hence it is necessary to awaken men to a sense of guilt and 
danger, and thus produce an excitement of counter feeling 
and desire which will break the power of carnal and worldly 
desire and leave the will free to obey God. 

Look back at the history of the Jews, and you will see that 
God used to maintain religion among them by special occa- 
sions, when there would be a great excitement, and people 
would turn to the Lord. And after they had been thus re 
vived, it would be but a short time before there would be so 
many counteracting influences brought to bear upon them, 
that religion would decline, and keep on declining, till God 
could have time—so to speak—to convict them of sin by his 
Spirit and rebuke them by his providence, and thus so gain 
the attention of the masses to the great subject of salvation, 
as to produce a widespread awakening of religious interest, and 
consequently a revival of religion. Then the counteracting 
causes would again operate, and religion would decline, and 
the nation would be swept away in the vortex of luxury, idol- 
atry, and pride. 

There is so little principle in the church, so little firmness 
and stability of purpose, that unless the religious feelings are 
awakened and kept excited, counter worldly feeling and excite 
ment will prevail, and men will not obey God. They have so 
little knowledge, and their principles are so weak, that unless 
they are exoited, they will go back from the path of duty, and 
do nothing to promote the glory of God. The state of the 
world is still such, and probably will be till the millennium is 
fully come, that religion must be mainly promoted by means 
of revivals. How long and how often has the experiment 
been tried, to bring the church to act steadily for God, with- 
out these periodical excitements. Many good men have sup- 
posed, and still suppose, that the best way to promote reli 
gion, is to go along uniformly, and gather in the ungodly grad 
ually, and without excitement. But however sound such rea 
WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS. li 
soning may appear in the abstract, facts demonstrate its futili- 
ty. If the church were far enough advanced in knowledge,
